



Produced by John Bickers; Dagny





BLACK HEART AND WHITE HEART

by H. Rider Haggard




DEDICATION

To the Memory of the Child

Nada Burnham,

who "bound all to her" and, while her father cut his way through the
hordes of the Ingobo Regiment, perished of the hardships of war
at Buluwayo on 19th May, 1896, I dedicate these tales--and more
particularly the last, that of a Faith which triumphed over savagery and
death.

H. Rider Haggard.

Ditchingham.




AUTHOR'S NOTE

Of the three stories that comprise this volume[*], one, "The Wizard," a
tale of victorious faith, first appeared some years ago as a Christmas
Annual. Another, "Elissa," is an attempt, difficult enough owing to the
scantiness of the material left to us by time, to recreate the life of
the ancient Phoenician Zimbabwe, whose ruins still stand in Rhodesia,
and, with the addition of the necessary love story, to suggest
circumstances such as might have brought about or accompanied its fall
at the hands of the surrounding savage tribes. The third, "Black Heart
and White Heart," is a story of the courtship, trials and final union of
a pair of Zulu lovers in the time of King Cetywayo.

     [*] This text was prepared from a volume published in 1900
     titled "Black Heart and White Heart, and Other Stories."--
     JB.





BLACK HEART AND WHITE HEART

A ZULU IDYLL



CHAPTER I

PHILIP HADDEN AND KING CETYWAYO

At the date of our introduction to him, Philip Hadden was a
transport-rider and trader in "the Zulu." Still on the right side of
forty, in appearance he was singularly handsome; tall, dark, upright,
with keen eyes, short-pointed beard, curling hair and clear-cut
features. His life had been varied, and there were passages in it which
he did not narrate even to his most intimate friends. He was of gentle
birth, however, and it was said that he had received a public school and
university education in England. At any rate he could quote the classics
with aptitude on occasion, an accomplishment which, coupled with his
refined voice and a bearing not altogether common in the wild places
of the world, had earned for him among his rough companions the
soubriquet of "The Prince."

However these things may have been, it is certain that he had emigrated
to Natal under a cloud, and equally certain that his relatives at home
were content to take no further interest in his fortunes. During the
fifteen or sixteen years which he had spent in or about the colony,
Hadden followed many trades, and did no good at any of them. A clever
man, of agreeable and prepossessing manner, he always found it easy to
form friendships and to secure a fresh start in life. But, by degrees,
the friends were seized with a vague distrust of him; and, after a
period of more or less application, he himself would close the opening
that he had made by a sudden disappearance from the locality, leaving
behind him a doubtful reputation and some bad debts.

Before the beginning of this story of the most remarkable episodes
in his life, Philip Hadden was engaged for several years in
transport-riding--that is, in carrying goods on ox waggons from Durban
or Maritzburg to various points in the interior. A difficulty such as
had more than once confronted him in the course of his career, led to
his temporary abandonment of this means of earning a livelihood. On
arriving at the little frontier town of Utrecht in the Transvaal, in
charge of two waggon loads of mixed goods consigned to a storekeeper
there, it was discovered that out of six cases of brandy five were
missing from his waggon. Hadden explained the matter by throwing the
blame upon his Kaffir "boys," but the storekeeper, a rough-tongued man,
openly called him a thief and refused to pay the freight on any of
the load. From words the two men came to blows, knives were drawn, and
before anybody could interfere the storekeeper received a nasty wound in
his side. That night, without waiting till the matter could be inquired
into by the landdrost or magistrate, Hadden slipped away, and trekked
back into Natal as quickly as his oxen would travel. Feeling that even
here he was not safe, he left one of his waggons at Newcastle, loaded up
the other with Kaffir goods--such as blankets, calico, and hardware--and
crossed into Zululand, where in those days no sheriff's officer would be
likely to follow him.

Being well acquainted with the language and customs of the natives, he
did good trade with them, and soon found himself possessed of some cash
and a small herd of cattle, which he received in exchange for his wares.
Meanwhile news reached him that the man whom he had injured still vowed
vengeance against him, and was in communication with the authorities in
Natal. These reasons making his return to civilisation undesirable for
the moment, and further business being impossible until he could
receive a fresh supply of trade stuff, Hadden like a wise man turned his
thoughts to pleasure. Sending his cattle and waggon over the border to
be left in charge of a native headman with whom he was friendly, he went
on foot to Ulundi to obtain permission from the king, Cetywayo, to hunt
game in his country. Somewhat to his surprise, the Indunas or headmen,
received him courteously--for Hadden's visit took place within a few
months of the outbreak of the Zulu war in 1878, when Cetywayo was
already showing unfriendliness to the English traders and others, though
why the king did so they knew not.

On the occasion of his first and last interview with Cetywayo, Hadden
got a hint of the reason. It happened thus. On the second morning after
his arrival at the royal kraal, a messenger came to inform him that
"the Elephant whose tread shook the earth" had signified that it was
his pleasure to see him. Accordingly he was led through the thousands of
huts and across the Great Place to the little enclosure where Cetywayo,
a royal-looking Zulu seated on a stool, and wearing a kaross of leopard
skins, was holding an indaba, or conference, surrounded by his
counsellors. The Induna who had conducted him to the august presence
went down upon his hands and knees, and, uttering the royal salute of
Bayéte, crawled forward to announce that the white man was waiting.

"Let him wait," said the king angrily; and, turning, he continued the
discussion with his counsellors.

Now, as has been said, Hadden thoroughly understood Zulu; and, when
from time to time the king raised his voice, some of the words he spoke
reached his ear.

"What!" Cetywayo said, to a wizened and aged man who seemed to be
pleading with him earnestly; "am I a dog that these white hyenas should
hunt me thus? Is not the land mine, and was it not my father's before
me? Are not the people mine to save or to slay? I tell you that I will
stamp out these little white men; my impis shall eat them up. I have
said!"

Again the withered aged man interposed, evidently in the character of
a peacemaker. Hadden could not hear his talk, but he rose and pointed
towards the sea, while from his expressive gestures and sorrowful mien,
he seemed to be prophesying disaster should a certain course of action
be followed.

For a while the king listened to him, then he sprang from his seat, his
eyes literally ablaze with rage.

"Hearken," he cried to the counsellor; "I have guessed it for long, and
now I am sure of it. You are a traitor. You are Sompseu's[*] dog, and
the dog of the Natal Government, and I will not keep another man's dog
to bite me in my own house. Take him away!"

     [*] Sir Theophilus Shepstone's.

A slight involuntary murmur rose from the ring of indunas, but the
old man never flinched, not even when the soldiers, who presently would
murder him, came and seized him roughly. For a few seconds, perhaps
five, he covered his face with the corner of the kaross he wore, then he
looked up and spoke to the king in a clear voice.

"O King," he said, "I am a very old man; as a youth I served under Chaka
the Lion, and I heard his dying prophecy of the coming of the white man.
Then the white men came, and I fought for Dingaan at the battle of the
Blood River. They slew Dingaan, and for many years I was the counsellor
of Panda, your father. I stood by you, O King, at the battle of the
Tugela, when its grey waters were turned to red with the blood of
Umbulazi your brother, and of the tens of thousands of his people.
Afterwards I became your counsellor, O King, and I was with you
when Sompseu set the crown upon your head and you made promises to
Sompseu--promises that you have not kept. Now you are weary of me, and
it is well; for I am very old, and doubtless my talk is foolish, as
it chances to the old. Yet I think that the prophecy of Chaka, your
great-uncle, will come true, and that the white men will prevail against
you and that through them you shall find your death. I would that I
might have stood in one more battle and fought for you, O King, since
fight you will, but the end which you choose is for me the best end.
Sleep in peace, O King, and farewell. Bayéte!"[*]

     [*] The royal salute of the Zulus.

For a space there was silence, a silence of expectation while men waited
to hear the tyrant reverse his judgment. But it did not please him to be
merciful, or the needs of policy outweighed his pity.

"Take him away," he repeated. Then, with a slow smile on his face
and one word, "Good-night," upon his lips, supported by the arm of a
soldier, the old warrior and statesman shuffled forth to the place of
death.

Hadden watched and listened in amazement not unmixed with fear. "If
he treats his own servants like this, what will happen to me?" he
reflected. "We English must have fallen out of favour since I left
Natal. I wonder whether he means to make war on us or what? If so, this
isn't my place."

Just then the king, who had been gazing moodily at the ground, chanced
to look up. "Bring the stranger here," he said.

Hadden heard him, and coming forward offered Cetywayo his hand in as
cool and nonchalant a manner as he could command.

Somewhat to his surprise it was accepted. "At least, White Man," said
the king, glancing at his visitor's tall spare form and cleanly cut
face, "you are no 'umfagozan' (low fellow); you are of the blood of
chiefs."

"Yes, King," answered Hadden, with a little sigh, "I am of the blood of
chiefs."

"What do you want in my country, White Man?"

"Very little, King. I have been trading here, as I daresay you have
heard, and have sold all my goods. Now I ask your leave to hunt buffalo,
and other big game, for a while before I return to Natal."

"I cannot grant it," answered Cetywayo, "you are a spy sent by Sompseu,
or by the Queen's Induna in Natal. Get you gone."

"Indeed," said Hadden, with a shrug of his shoulders; "then I hope that
Sompseu, or the Queen's Induna, or both of them, will pay me when I
return to my own country. Meanwhile I will obey you because I must, but
I should first like to make you a present."

"What present?" asked the king. "I want no presents. We are rich here,
White Man."

"So be it, King. It was nothing worthy of your taking, only a rifle."

"A rifle, White Man? Where is it?"

"Without. I would have brought it, but your servants told me that it is
death to come armed before the 'Elephant who shakes the Earth.'"

Cetywayo frowned, for the note of sarcasm did not escape his quick ear.

"Let this white man's offering be brought; I will consider the thing."

Instantly the Induna who had accompanied Hadden darted to the gateway,
running with his body bent so low that it seemed as though at every step
he must fall upon his face. Presently he returned with the weapon in
his hand and presented it to the king, holding it so that the muzzle was
pointed straight at the royal breast.

"I crave leave to say, O Elephant," remarked Hadden in a drawling voice,
"that it might be well to command your servant to lift the mouth of that
gun from your heart."

"Why?" asked the king.

"Only because it is loaded, and at full cock, O Elephant, who probably
desires to continue to shake the Earth."

At these words the "Elephant" uttered a sharp exclamation, and rolled
from his stool in a most unkingly manner, whilst the terrified Induna,
springing backwards, contrived to touch the trigger of the rifle and
discharge a bullet through the exact spot that a second before had been
occupied by his monarch's head.

"Let him be taken away," shouted the incensed king from the ground, but
long before the words had passed his lips the Induna, with a cry that
the gun was bewitched, had cast it down and fled at full speed through
the gate.

"He has already taken himself away," suggested Hadden, while the
audience tittered. "No, King, do not touch it rashly; it is a repeating
rifle. Look----" and lifting the Winchester, he fired the four remaining
shots in quick succession into the air, striking the top of a tree at
which he aimed with every one of them.

"Wow, it is wonderful!" said the company in astonishment.

"Has the thing finished?" asked the king.

"For the present it has," answered Hadden. "Look at it."

Cetywayo took the repeater in his hand, and examined it with caution,
swinging the muzzle horizontally in an exact line with the stomachs of
some of his most eminent Indunas, who shrank to this side and that as
the barrel was brought to bear on them.

"See what cowards they are, White Man," said the king with indignation;
"they fear lest there should be another bullet in this gun."

"Yes," answered Hadden, "they are cowards indeed. I believe that if they
were seated on stools they would tumble off them just as it chanced to
your Majesty to do just now."

"Do you understand the making of guns, White Man?" asked the king
hastily, while the Indunas one and all turned their heads, and
contemplated the fence behind them.

"No, King, I cannot make guns, but I can mend them."

"If I paid you well, White Man, would you stop here at my kraal, and
mend guns for me?" asked Cetywayo anxiously.

"It might depend on the pay," answered Hadden; "but for awhile I am
tired of work, and wish to rest. If the king gives me the permission
to hunt for which I asked, and men to go with me, then when I return
perhaps we can bargain on the matter. If not, I will bid the king
farewell, and journey to Natal."

"In order to make report of what he has seen and learned here," muttered
Cetywayo.

At this moment the talk was interrupted, for the soldiers who had led
away the old Induna returned at speed, and prostrated themselves before
the king.

"Is he dead?" he asked.

"He has travelled the king's bridge," they answered grimly; "he died
singing a song of praise of the king."

"Good," said Cetywayo, "that stone shall hurt my feet no more. Go, tell
the tale of its casting away to Sompseu and to the Queen's Induna in
Natal," he added with bitter emphasis.

"Baba! Hear our Father speak. Listen to the rumbling of the Elephant,"
said the Indunas taking the point, while one bolder than the rest added:
"Soon we will tell them another tale, the white Talking Ones, a red
tale, a tale of spears, and the regiments shall sing it in their ears."

At the words an enthusiasm caught hold of the listeners, as the sudden
flame catches hold of dry grass. They sprang up, for the most of them
were seated on their haunches, and stamping their feet upon the ground
in unison, repeated:--

     Indaba ibomwu--indaba ye mikonto
     Lizo dunyiswa nge impi ndhlebeni yaho.
     (A red tale! A red tale! A tale of spears,
     And the impis shall sing it in their ears.)

One of them, indeed, a great fierce-faced fellow, drew near to Hadden
and shaking his fist before his eyes--fortunately being in the royal
presence he had no assegai--shouted the sentences at him.

The king saw that the fire he had lit was burning too fiercely.

"Silence," he thundered in the deep voice for which he was remarkable,
and instantly each man became as if he were turned to stone, only the
echoes still answered back: "And the impis shall sing it in their
ears--in their ears."

"I am growing certain that this is no place for me," thought Hadden;
"if that scoundrel had been armed he might have temporarily forgotten
himself. Hullo! who's this?"

Just then there appeared through the gate of the fence a splendid
specimen of the Zulu race. The man, who was about thirty-five years
of age, was arrayed in a full war dress of a captain of the Umcityu
regiment. From the circlet of otter skin on his brow rose his crest of
plumes, round his middle, arms and knees hung the long fringes of black
oxtails, and in one hand he bore a little dancing shield, also black in
colour. The other was empty, since he might not appear before the king
bearing arms. In countenance the man was handsome, and though just now
they betrayed some anxiety, his eyes were genial and honest, and his
mouth sensitive. In height he must have measured six foot two inches,
yet he did not strike the observer as being tall, perhaps because of
his width of chest and the solidity of his limbs, that were in curious
contrast to the delicate and almost womanish hands and feet which so
often mark the Zulu of noble blood. In short the man was what he seemed
to be, a savage gentleman of birth, dignity and courage.

In company with him was another man plainly dressed in a moocha and a
blanket, whose grizzled hair showed him to be over fifty years of age.
His face also was pleasant and even refined, but the eyes were timorous,
and the mouth lacked character.

"Who are these?" asked the king.

The two men fell on their knees before him, and bowed till their
foreheads touched the ground--the while giving him his sibonga or
titles of praise.

"Speak," he said impatiently.

"O King," said the young warrior, seating himself Zulu fashion, "I am
Nahoon, the son of Zomba, a captain of the Umcityu, and this is my uncle
Umgona, the brother of one of my mothers, my father's youngest wife."

Cetywayo frowned. "What do you here away from your regiment, Nahoon?"

"May it please the king, I have leave of absence from the head captains,
and I come to ask a boon of the king's bounty."

"Be swift, then, Nahoon."

"It is this, O King," said the captain with some embarrassment: "A while
ago the king was pleased to make a keshla of me because of certain
service that I did out yonder----" and he touched the black ring which
he wore in the hair of his head. "Being now a ringed man and a captain,
I crave the right of a man at the hands of the king--the right to
marry."

"Right? Speak more humbly, son of Zomba; my soldiers and my cattle have
no rights."

Nahoon bit his lip, for he had made a serious mistake.

"Pardon, O King. The matter stands thus: My uncle Umgona here has a
fair daughter named Nanea, whom I desire to wife, and who desires me to
husband. Awaiting the king's leave I am betrothed to her and in earnest
of it I have paid to Umgona a lobola of fifteen head of cattle, cows
and calves together. But Umgona has a powerful neighbour, an old chief
named Maputa, the warden of the Crocodile Drift, who doubtless is known
to the king, and this chief also seeks Nanea in marriage and harries
Umgona, threatening him with many evils if he will not give the girl to
him. But Umgona's heart is white towards me, and towards Maputa it is
black, therefore together we come to crave this boon of the king."

"It is so; he speaks the truth," said Umgona.

"Cease," answered Cetywayo angrily. "Is this a time that my soldiers
should seek wives in marriage, wives to turn their hearts to water? Know
that but yesterday for this crime I commanded that twenty girls who
had dared without my leave to marry men of the Undi regiment, should be
strangled and their bodies laid upon the cross-roads and with them the
bodies of their fathers, that all might know their sin and be warned
thereby. Ay, Umgona, it is well for you and for your daughter that you
sought my word before she was given in marriage to this man. Now this
is my award: I refuse your prayer, Nahoon, and since you, Umgona, are
troubled with one whom you would not take as son-in-law, the old chief
Maputa, I will free you from his importunity. The girl, says Nahoon, is
fair--good, I myself will be gracious to her, and she shall be numbered
among the wives of the royal house. Within thirty days from now, in the
week of the next new moon, let her be delivered to the Sigodhla, the
royal house of the women, and with her those cattle, the cows and the
calves together, that Nahoon has given you, of which I fine him because
he has dared to think of marriage without the leave of the king."



CHAPTER II

THE BEE PROPHESIES

"'A Daniel come to judgment' indeed," reflected Hadden, who had been
watching this savage comedy with interest; "our love-sick friend has got
more than he bargained for. Well, that comes of appealing to Cæsar," and
he turned to look at the two suppliants.

The old man, Umgona, merely started, then began to pour out sentences
of conventional thanks and praise to the king for his goodness and
condescension. Cetywayo listened to his talk in silence, and when he had
done answered by reminding him tersely that if Nanea did not appear
at the date named, both she and he, her father, would in due course
certainly decorate a cross-road in their own immediate neighbourhood.

The captain, Nahoon, afforded a more curious study. As the fatal
words crossed the king's lips, his face took an expression of absolute
astonishment, which was presently replaced by one of fury--the just fury
of a man who suddenly has suffered an unutterable wrong. His whole frame
quivered, the veins stood out in knots on his neck and forehead, and his
fingers closed convulsively as though they were grasping the handle of a
spear. Presently the rage passed away--for as well might a man be wroth
with fate as with a Zulu despot--to be succeeded by a look of the most
hopeless misery. The proud dark eyes grew dull, the copper-coloured face
sank in and turned ashen, the mouth drooped, and down one corner of
it there trickled a little line of blood springing from the lip bitten
through in the effort to keep silence. Lifting his hand in salute to the
king, the great man rose and staggered rather than walked towards the
gate.

As he reached it, the voice of Cetywayo commanded him to stop. "Stay,"
he said, "I have a service for you, Nahoon, that shall drive out of your
head these thoughts of wives and marriage. You see this white man here;
he is my guest, and would hunt buffalo and big game in the bush country.
I put him in your charge; take men with you, and see that he comes to no
hurt. So also that you bring him before me within a month, or your life
shall answer for it. Let him be here at my royal kraal in the first week
of the new moon--when Nanea comes--and then I will tell you whether or
no I agree with you that she is fair. Go now, my child, and you, White
Man, go also; those who are to accompany you shall be with you at the
dawn. Farewell, but remember we meet again at the new moon, when we will
settle what pay you shall receive as keeper of my guns. Do not fail me,
White Man, or I shall send after you, and my messengers are sometimes
rough."

"This means that I am a prisoner," thought Hadden, "but it will go hard
if I cannot manage to give them the slip somehow. I don't intend to
stay in this country if war is declared, to be pounded into mouti
(medicine), or have my eyes put out, or any little joke of that sort."

*****

Ten days had passed, and one evening Hadden and his escort were encamped
in a wild stretch of mountainous country lying between the Blood and
Unvunyana Rivers, not more than eight miles from that "Place of the
Little Hand" which within a few weeks was to become famous throughout
the world by its native name of Isandhlwana. For three days they had
been tracking the spoor of a small herd of buffalo that still inhabited
the district, but as yet they had not come up with them. The Zulu
hunters had suggested that they should follow the Unvunyana down towards
the sea where game was more plentiful, but this neither Hadden, nor the
captain, Nahoon, had been anxious to do, for reasons which each of them
kept secret to himself. Hadden's object was to work gradually down to
the Buffalo River across which he hoped to effect a retreat into Natal.
That of Nahoon was to linger in the neighbourhood of the kraal of
Umgona, which was situated not very far from their present camping
place, in the vague hope that he might find an opportunity of speaking
with or at least of seeing Nanea, the girl to whom he was affianced, who
within a few weeks must be taken from him, and given over to the king.

A more eerie-looking spot than that where they were encamped Hadden
had never seen. Behind them lay a tract of land--half-swamp and
half-bush--in which the buffalo were supposed to be hiding. Beyond, in
lonely grandeur, rose the mountain of Isandhlwana, while in front was an
amphitheatre of the most gloomy forest, ringed round in the distance by
sheer-sided hills. Into this forest there ran a river which drained the
swamp, placidly enough upon the level. But it was not always level, for
within three hundred yards of them it dashed suddenly over a precipice,
of no great height but very steep, falling into a boiling rock-bound
pool that the light of the sun never seemed to reach.

"What is the name of that forest, Nahoon?" asked Hadden.

"It is named Emagudu, The Home of the Dead," the Zulu replied
absently, for he was looking towards the kraal of Nanea, which was
situated at an hour's walk away over the ridge to the right.

"The Home of the Dead! Why?"

"Because the dead live there, those whom we name the Esemkofu, the
Speechless Ones, and with them other Spirits, the Amahlosi, from whom
the breath of life has passed away, and who yet live on."

"Indeed," said Hadden, "and have you ever seen these ghosts?"

"Am I mad that I should go to look for them, White Man? Only the dead
enter that forest, and it is on the borders of it that our people make
offerings to the dead."

Followed by Nahoon, Hadden walked to the edge of the cliff and looked
over it. To the left lay the deep and dreadful-looking pool, while close
to the bank of it, placed upon a narrow strip of turf between the cliff
and the commencement of the forest, was a hut.

"Who lives there?" asked Hadden.

"The great Isanusi--she who is named Inyanga or Doctoress; she who
is named Inyosi (the Bee), because she gathers wisdom from the dead who
grow in the forest."

"Do you think that she could gather enough wisdom to tell me whether I
am going to kill any buffalo, Nahoon?"

"Mayhap, White Man, but," he added with a little smile, "those who visit
the Bee's hive may hear nothing, or they may hear more than they wish
for. The words of that Bee have a sting."

"Good; I will see if she can sting me."

"So be it," said Nahoon; and turning, he led the way along the cliff
till he reached a native path which zig-zagged down its face.

By this path they climbed till they came to the sward at the foot of the
descent, and walked up it to the hut which was surrounded by a low fence
of reeds, enclosing a small court-yard paved with ant-heap earth beaten
hard and polished. In this court-yard sat the Bee, her stool being
placed almost at the mouth of the round opening that served as a doorway
to the hut. At first all that Hadden could see of her, crouched as she
was in the shadow, was a huddled shape wrapped round with a greasy and
tattered catskin kaross, above the edge of which appeared two eyes,
fierce and quick as those of a leopard. At her feet smouldered a little
fire, and ranged around it in a semi-circle were a number of human
skulls, placed in pairs as though they were talking together, whilst
other bones, to all appearance also human, were festooned about the hut
and the fence of the courtyard.

"I see that the old lady is set up with the usual properties," thought
Hadden, but he said nothing.

Nor did the witch-doctoress say anything; she only fixed her beady eyes
upon his face. Hadden returned the compliment, staring at her with all
his might, till suddenly he became aware that he was vanquished in this
curious duel. His brain grew confused, and to his fancy it seemed that
the woman before him had shifted shape into the likeness of colossal
and horrid spider sitting at the mouth of her trap, and that these bones
were the relics of her victims.

"Why do you not speak, White Man?" she said at last in a slow clear
voice. "Well, there is no need, since I can read your thoughts. You are
thinking that I who am called the Bee should be better named the Spider.
Have no fear; I did not kill these men. What would it profit me when the
dead are so many? I suck the souls of men, not their bodies, White Man.
It is their living hearts I love to look on, for therein I read much and
thereby I grow wise. Now what would you of the Bee, White Man, the Bee
that labours in this Garden of Death, and--what brings you here,
son of Zomba? Why are you not with the Umcityu now that they doctor
themselves for the great war--the last war--the war of the white and the
black--or if you have no stomach for fighting, why are you not at the
side of Nanea the tall, Nanea the fair?"

Nahoon made no answer, but Hadden said:--

"A small thing, mother. I would know if I shall prosper in my hunting."

"In your hunting, White Man; what hunting? The hunting of game, of
money, or of women? Well, one of them, for a-hunting you must ever be;
that is your nature, to hunt and be hunted. Tell me now, how goes the
wound of that trader who tasted of your steel yonder in the town of the
Maboon (Boers)? No need to answer, White Man, but what fee, Chief, for
the poor witch-doctoress whose skill you seek," she added in a whining
voice. "Surely you would not that an old woman should work without a
fee?"

"I have none to offer you, mother, so I will be going," said Hadden, who
began to feel himself satisfied with this display of the Bee's powers of
observation and thought-reading.

"Nay," she answered with an unpleasant laugh, "would you ask a question,
and not wait for the answer? I will take no fee from you at present,
White Man; you shall pay me later on when we meet again," and once more
she laughed. "Let me look in your face, let me look in your face," she
continued, rising and standing before him.

Then of a sudden Hadden felt something cold at the back of his neck, and
the next instant the Bee had sprung from him, holding between her thumb
and finger a curl of dark hair which she had cut from his head. The
action was so instantaneous that he had neither time to avoid nor to
resent it, but stood still staring at her stupidly.

"That is all I need," she cried, "for like my heart my magic is white.
Stay--son of Zomba, give me also of your hair, for those who visit the
Bee must listen to her humming."

Nahoon obeyed, cutting a little lock from his head with the sharp edge
of his assegai, though it was very evident that he did this not because
he wished to do so, but because he feared to refuse.

Then the Bee slipped back her kaross, and stood bending over the fire
before them, into which she threw herbs taken from a pouch that was
bound about her middle. She was still a finely-shaped woman, and she
wore none of the abominations which Hadden had been accustomed to see
upon the persons of witch-doctoresses. About her neck, however, was a
curious ornament, a small live snake, red and grey in hue, which her
visitors recognised as one of the most deadly to be found in that
part of the country. It is not unusual for Bantu witch-doctors thus to
decorate themselves with snakes, though whether or not their fangs have
first been extracted no one seems to know.

Presently the herbs began to smoulder, and the smoke of them rose up in
a thin, straight stream, that, striking upon the face of the Bee, clung
about her head enveloping it as though with a strange blue veil. Then of
a sudden she stretched out her hands, and let fall the two locks of
hair upon the burning herbs, where they writhed themselves to ashes like
things alive. Next she opened her mouth, and began to draw the fumes
of the hair and herbs into her lungs in great gulps; while the snake,
feeling the influence of the medicine, hissed and, uncoiling itself
from about her neck, crept upwards and took refuge among the black
saccaboola feathers of her head-dress.

Soon the vapours began to do their work; she swayed to and fro
muttering, then sank back against the hut, upon the straw of which her
head rested. Now the Bee's face was turned upwards towards the light,
and it was ghastly to behold, for it had become blue in colour, and
the open eyes were sunken like the eyes of one dead, whilst above her
forehead the red snake wavered and hissed, reminding Hadden of the
Uraeus crest on the brow of statues of Egyptian kings. For ten seconds
or more she remained thus, then she spoke in a hollow and unnatural
voice:--

"O Black Heart and body that is white and beautiful, I look into your
heart, and it is black as blood, and it shall be black with blood.
Beautiful white body with black heart, you shall find your game and hunt
it, and it shall lead you into the House of the Homeless, into the Home
of the Dead, and it shall be shaped as a bull, it shall be shaped as a
tiger, it shall be shaped as a woman whom kings and waters cannot harm.
Beautiful white body and black heart, you shall be paid your wages,
money for money, and blow for blow. Think of my word when the spotted
cat purrs above your breast; think of it when the battle roars about
you; think of it when you grasp your great reward, and for the last time
stand face to face with the ghost of the dead in the Home of the Dead.

"O White Heart and black body, I look into your heart and it is white as
milk, and the milk of innocence shall save it. Fool, why do you strike
that blow? Let him be who is loved of the tiger, and whose love is as
the love of a tiger. Ah! what face is that in the battle? Follow it,
follow it, O swift of foot; but follow warily, for the tongue that has
lied will never plead for mercy, and the hand that can betray is strong
in war. White Heart, what is death? In death life lives, and among the
dead you shall find the life you lost, for there awaits you she whom
kings and waters cannot harm."

As the Bee spoke, by degrees her voice sank lower and lower till it was
almost inaudible. Then it ceased altogether and she seemed to pass from
trance to sleep. Hadden, who had been listening to her with an amused
and cynical smile, now laughed aloud.

"Why do you laugh, White Man?" asked Nahoon angrily.

"I laugh at my own folly in wasting time listening to the nonsense of
that lying fraud."

"It is no nonsense, White Man."

"Indeed? Then will you tell me what it means?"

"I cannot tell you what it means yet, but her words have to do with a
woman and a leopard, and with your fate and my fate."

Hadden shrugged his shoulders, not thinking the matter worth further
argument, and at that moment the Bee woke up shivering, drew the red
snake from her head-dress and coiling it about her throat wrapped
herself again in the greasy kaross.

"Are you satisfied with my wisdom, Inkoos?" she asked of Hadden.

"I am satisfied that you are one of the cleverest cheats in Zululand,
mother," he answered coolly. "Now, what is there to pay?"

The Bee took no offence at this rude speech, though for a second or two
the look in her eyes grew strangely like that which they had seen in
those of the snake when the fumes of the fire made it angry.

"If the white lord says I am a cheat, it must be so," she answered, "for
he of all men should be able to discern a cheat. I have said that I ask
no fee;--yes, give me a little tobacco from your pouch."

Hadden opened the bag of antelope hide and drawing some tobacco from it,
gave it to her. In taking it she clasped his hand and examined the gold
ring that was upon the third finger, a ring fashioned like a snake with
two little rubies set in the head to represent the eyes.

"I wear a snake about my neck, and you wear one upon your hand,
Inkoos. I should like to have this ring to wear upon my hand, so that
the snake about my neck may be less lonely there."

"Then I am afraid you will have to wait till I am dead," said Hadden.

"Yes, yes," she answered in a pleased voice, "it is a good word. I will
wait till you are dead and then I will take the ring, and none can say
that I have stolen it, for Nahoon there will bear me witness that you
gave me permission to do so."

For the first time Hadden started, since there was something about
the Bee's tone that jarred upon him. Had she addressed him in her
professional manner, he would have thought nothing of it; but in her
cupidity she had become natural, and it was evident that she spoke from
conviction, believing her own words.

She saw him start, and instantly changed her note.

"Let the white lord forgive the jest of a poor old witch-doctoress," she
said in a whining voice. "I have so much to do with Death that his name
leaps to my lips," and she glanced first at the circle of skulls about
her, then towards the waterfall that fed the gloomy pool upon whose
banks her hut was placed.

"Look," she said simply.

Following the line of her outstretched hand Hadden's eyes fell upon two
withered mimosa trees which grew over the fall almost at right angles to
its rocky edge. These trees were joined together by a rude platform made
of logs of wood lashed down with riems of hide. Upon this platform
stood three figures; notwithstanding the distance and the spray of the
fall, he could see that they were those of two men and a girl, for their
shapes stood out distinctly against the fiery red of the sunset sky.
One instant there were three, the next there were two--for the girl had
gone, and something dark rushing down the face of the fall, struck the
surface of the pool with a heavy thud, while a faint and piteous cry
broke upon his ear.

"What is the meaning of that?" he asked, horrified and amazed.

"Nothing," answered the Bee with a laugh. "Do you not know, then, that
this is the place where faithless women, or girls who have loved without
the leave of the king, are brought to meet their death, and with them
their accomplices. Oh! they die here thus each day, and I watch them
die and keep the count of the number of them," and drawing a tally-stick
from the thatch of the hut, she took a knife and added a notch to
the many that appeared upon it, looking at Nahoon the while with a
half-questioning, half-warning gaze.

"Yes, yes, it is a place of death," she muttered. "Up yonder the quick
die day by day and down there"--and she pointed along the course of the
river beyond the pool to where the forest began some two hundred yards
from her hut--"the ghosts of them have their home. Listen!"

As she spoke, a sound reached their ears that seemed to swell from
the dim skirts of the forests, a peculiar and unholy sound which it
is impossible to define more accurately than by saying that it seemed
beastlike, and almost inarticulate.

"Listen," repeated the Bee, "they are merry yonder."

"Who?" asked Hadden; "the baboons?"

"No, Inkoos, the Amatongo--the ghosts that welcome her who has just
become of their number."

"Ghosts," said Hadden roughly, for he was angry at his own tremors, "I
should like to see those ghosts. Do you think that I have never heard
a troop of monkeys in the bush before, mother? Come, Nahoon, let us be
going while there is light to climb the cliff. Farewell."

"Farewell Inkoos, and doubt not that your wish will be fulfilled. Go
in peace Inkoos--to sleep in peace."



CHAPTER III

THE END OF THE HUNT

The prayer of the Bee notwithstanding, Philip Hadden slept ill that
night. He felt in the best of health, and his conscience was not
troubling him more than usual, but rest he could not. Whenever he closed
his eyes, his mind conjured up a picture of the grim witch-doctoress,
so strangely named the Bee, and the sound of her evil-omened words as
he had heard them that afternoon. He was neither a superstitious nor a
timid man, and any supernatural beliefs that might linger in his mind
were, to say the least of it, dormant. But do what he might, he could
not shake off a certain eerie sensation of fear, lest there should be
some grains of truth in the prophesyings of this hag. What if it were
a fact that he was near his death, and that the heart which beat so
strongly in his breast must soon be still for ever--no, he would not
think of it. This gloomy place, and the dreadful sight which he saw that
day, had upset his nerves. The domestic customs of these Zulus were not
pleasant, and for his part he was determined to be clear of them so soon
as he was able to escape the country.

In fact, if he could in any way manage it, it was his intention to make
a dash for the border on the following night. To do this with a good
prospect of success, however, it was necessary that he should kill a
buffalo, or some other head of game. Then, as he knew well, the hunters
with him would feast upon meat until they could scarcely stir, and that
would be his opportunity. Nahoon, however, might not succumb to this
temptation; therefore he must trust to luck to be rid of him. If it came
to the worst, he could put a bullet through him, which he considered
he would be justified in doing, seeing that in reality the man was his
jailor. Should this necessity arise, he felt indeed that he could face
it without undue compunction, for in truth he disliked Nahoon; at times
he even hated him. Their natures were antagonistic, and he knew that the
great Zulu distrusted and looked down upon him, and to be looked down
upon by a savage "nigger" was more than his pride could stomach.

At the first break of dawn Hadden rose and roused his escort, who were
still stretched in sleep around the dying fire, each man wrapped in his
kaross or blanket. Nahoon stood up and shook himself, looking gigantic
in the shadows of the morning.

"What is your will, Umlungu (white man), that you are up before the
sun?"

"My will, Muntumpofu (yellow man), is to hunt buffalo," answered
Hadden coolly. It irritated him that this savage should give him no
title of any sort.

"Your pardon," said the Zulu reading his thoughts, "but I cannot call
you Inkoos because you are not my chief, or any man's; still if the
title 'white man' offends you, we will give you a name."

"As you wish," answered Hadden briefly.

Accordingly they gave him a name, Inhlizin-mgama, by which he was
known among them thereafter, but Hadden was not best pleased when he
found that the meaning of those soft-sounding syllables was "Black
Heart." That was how the inyanga had addressed him--only she used
different words.

An hour later, and they were in the swampy bush country that lay behind
the encampment searching for their game. Within a very little while
Nahoon held up his hand, then pointed to the ground. Hadden looked;
there, pressed deep in the marshy soil, and to all appearance not ten
minutes old, was the spoor of a small herd of buffalo.

"I knew that we should find game to-day," whispered Nahoon, "because the
Bee said so."

"Curse the Bee," answered Hadden below his breath. "Come on."

For a quarter of an hour or more they followed the spoor through thick
reeds, till suddenly Nahoon whistled very softly and touched Hadden's
arm. He looked up, and there, about two hundred yards away, feeding
on some higher ground among a patch if mimosa trees, were the
buffaloes--six of them--an old bull with a splendid head, three cows, a
heifer and a calf about four months old. Neither the wind nor the nature
of the veldt were favourable for them to stalk the game from their
present position, so they made a detour of half a mile and very
carefully crept towards them up the wind, slipping from trunk to trunk
of the mimosas and when these failed them, crawling on their stomachs
under cover of the tall tambuti grass. At last they were within forty
yards, and a further advance seemed impracticable; for although he could
not smell them, it was evident from his movements that the old bull
heard some unusual sound and was growing suspicious. Nearest to Hadden,
who alone of the party had a rifle, stood the heifer broadside on--a
beautiful shot. Remembering that she would make the best beef, he lifted
his Martini, and aiming at her immediately behind the shoulder, gently
squeezed the trigger. The rifle exploded, and the heifer fell dead, shot
through the heart. Strangely enough the other buffaloes did not at once
run away. On the contrary, they seemed puzzled to account for the sudden
noise; and, not being able to wind anything, lifted their heads and
stared round them.

The pause gave Hadden space to get in a fresh cartridge and to aim
again, this time at the old bull. The bullet struck him somewhere in the
neck or shoulder, for he came to his knees, but in another second was up
and having caught sight of the cloud of smoke he charged straight at it.
Because of this smoke, or for some other reason, Hadden did not see him
coming, and in consequence would most certainly have been trampled or
gored, had not Nahoon sprung forward, at the imminent risk of his own
life, and dragged him down behind an ant-heap. A moment more and the
great beast had thundered by, taking no further notice of them.

"Forward," said Hadden, and leaving most of the men to cut up the heifer
and carry the best of her meat to camp, they started on the blood spoor.

For some hours they followed the bull, till at last they lost the trail
on a patch of stony ground thickly covered with bush, and exhausted by
the heat, sat down to rest and to eat some biltong or sun-dried flesh
which they had with them. They finished their meal, and were preparing
to return to the camp, when one of the four Zulus who were with them
went to drink at a little stream that ran at a distance of not more than
ten paces away. Half a minute later they heard a hideous grunting noise
and a splashing of water, and saw the Zulu fly into the air. All the
while that they were eating, the wounded buffalo had been lying in
wait for them under a thick bush on the banks of the streamlet,
knowing--cunning brute that he was--that sooner or later his turn would
come. With a shout of consternation they rushed forward to see the bull
vanish over the rise before Hadden could get a chance of firing at him,
and to find their companion dying, for the great horn had pierced his
lung.

"It is not a buffalo, it is a devil," the poor fellow gasped, and
expired.

"Devil or not, I mean to kill it," exclaimed Hadden. So leaving the
others to carry the body of their comrade to camp, he started on
accompanied by Nahoon only. Now the ground was more open and the chase
easier, for they sighted their quarry frequently, though they could not
come near enough to fire. Presently they travelled down a steep cliff.

"Do you know where we are?" asked Nahoon, pointing to a belt of forest
opposite. "That is Emagudu, the Home of the Dead--and look, the bull
heads thither."

Hadden glanced round him. It was true; yonder to the left were the Fall,
the Pool of Doom, and the hut of the Bee.

"Very well," he answered; "then we must head for it too."

Nahoon halted. "Surely you would not enter there," he exclaimed.

"Surely I will," replied Hadden, "but there is no need for you to do so
if you are afraid."

"I am afraid--of ghosts," said the Zulu, "but I will come."

So they crossed the strip of turf, and entered the haunted wood. It
was a gloomy place indeed; the great wide-topped trees grew thick there
shutting out the sight of the sky; moreover, the air in it which no
breeze stirred, was heavy with the exhalations of rotting foliage. There
seemed to be no life here and no sound--only now and again a loathsome
spotted snake would uncoil itself and glide away, and now and again a
heavy rotten bough fell with a crash.

Hadden was too intent upon the buffalo, however, to be much impressed
by his surroundings. He only remarked that the light would be bad for
shooting, and went on.

They must have penetrated a mile or more into the forest when the sudden
increase of blood upon the spoor told them that the bull's wound was
proving fatal to him.

"Run now," said Hadden cheerfully.

"Nay, hamba gachle--go softly--" answered Nahoon, "the devil is dying,
but he will try to play us another trick before he dies." And he went on
peering ahead of him cautiously.

"It is all right here, anyway," said Hadden, pointing to the spoor that
ran straight forward printed deep in the marshy ground.

Nahoon did not answer, but stared steadily at the trunks of two trees a
few paces in front of them and to their right. "Look," he whispered.

Hadden did so, and at length made out the outline of something brown
that was crouched behind the trees.

"He is dead," he exclaimed.

"No," answered Nahoon, "he has come back on his own path and is waiting
for us. He knows that we are following his spoor. Now if you stand
there, I think that you can shoot him through the back between the tree
trunks."

Hadden knelt down, and aiming very carefully at a point just below the
bull's spine, he fired. There was an awful bellow, and the next instant
the brute was up and at them. Nahoon flung his broad spear, which sank
deep into its chest, then they fled this way and that. The buffalo stood
still for a moment, its fore legs straddled wide and its head down,
looking first after the one and then the other, till of a sudden it
uttered a low moaning sound and rolled over dead, smashing Nahoon's
assegai to fragments as it fell.

"There! he's finished," said Hadden, "and I believe it was your assegai
that killed him. Hullo! what's that noise?"

Nahoon listened. In several quarters of the forest, but from how far
away it was impossible to tell, there rose a curious sound, as of people
calling to each other in fear but in no articulate language. Nahoon
shivered.

"It is the Esemkofu," he said, "the ghosts who have no tongue, and
who can only wail like infants. Let us be going; this place is bad for
mortals."

"And worse for buffaloes," said Hadden, giving the dead bull a kick,
"but I suppose that we must leave him here for your friends, the
Esemkofu, as we have got meat enough, and can't carry his head."

So they started back towards the open country. As they threaded their
way slowly through the tree trunks, a new idea came into Hadden's head.
Once out of this forest, he was within an hour's run of the Zulu border,
and once over the Zulu border, he would feel a happier man than he did
at that moment. As has been said, he had intended to attempt to escape
in the darkness, but the plan was risky. All the Zulus might not
over-eat themselves and go to sleep, especially after the death of their
comrade; Nahoon, who watched him day and night, certainly would not.
This was his opportunity--there remained the question of Nahoon.

Well, if it came to the worst, Nahoon must die: it would be easy--he
had a loaded rifle, and now that his assegai was gone, Nahoon had only
a kerry. He did not wish to kill the man, though it was clear to
him, seeing that his own safety was at stake, that he would be amply
justified in so doing. Why should he not put it to him--and then be
guided by circumstances?

Nahoon was walking across a little open space about ten spaces ahead of
him where Hadden could see him very well, whilst he himself was under
the shadow of a large tree with low horizontal branches running out from
the trunk.

"Nahoon," he said.

The Zulu turned round, and took a step towards him.

"No, do not move, I pray. Stand where you are, or I shall be obliged
to shoot you. Listen now: do not be afraid for I shall not fire without
warning. I am your prisoner, and you are charged to take me back to the
king to be his servant. But I believe that a war is going to break out
between your people and mine; and this being so, you will understand
that I do not wish to go to Cetywayo's kraal, because I should either
come to a violent death there, or my own brothers will believe that I
am a traitor and treat me accordingly. The Zulu border is not much more
than an hour's journey away--let us say an hour and a half's: I mean to
be across it before the moon is up. Now, Nahoon, will you lose me in the
forest and give me this hour and a half's start--or will you stop here
with that ghost people of whom you talk? Do you understand? No, please
do not move."

"I understand you," answered the Zulu, in a perfectly composed voice,
"and I think that was a good name which we gave you this morning,
though, Black Heart, there is some justice in your words and more
wisdom. Your opportunity is good, and one which a man named as you are
should not let fall."

"I am glad to find that you take this view of the matter, Nahoon. And
now will you be so kind as to lose me, and to promise not to look for me
till the moon is up?"

"What do you mean, Black Heart?"

"What I say. Come, I have no time to spare."

"You are a strange man," said the Zulu reflectively. "You heard the
king's order to me: would you have me disobey the order of the king?"

"Certainly, I would. You have no reason to love Cetywayo, and it does
not matter to you whether or no I return to his kraal to mend guns
there. If you think that he will be angry because I am missing, you had
better cross the border also; we can go together."

"And leave my father and all my brethren to his vengeance? Black Heart,
you do not understand. How can you, being so named? I am a soldier, and
the king's word is the king's word. I hoped to have died fighting, but I
am the bird in your noose. Come, shoot, or you will not reach the border
before moonrise," and he opened his arms and smiled.

"If it must be, so let it be. Farewell, Nahoon, at least you are a brave
man, but every one of us must cherish his own life," answered Hadden
calmly.

Then with much deliberation he raised his rifle and covered the Zulu's
breast.

Already--whilst his victim stood there still smiling, although a
twitching of his lips betrayed the natural terrors that no bravery can
banish--already his finger was contracting on the trigger, when of a
sudden, as instantly as though he had been struck by lightning, Hadden
went down backwards, and behold! there stood upon him a great spotted
beast that waved its long tail to and fro and glared down into his eyes.

It was a leopard--a tiger as they call it in Africa--which, crouched
upon a bough of the tree above, had been unable to resist the temptation
of satisfying its savage appetite on the man below. For a second or two
there was silence, broken only by the purring, or rather the snoring
sound made by the leopard. In those seconds, strangely enough, there
sprang up before Hadden's mental vision a picture of the inyanga
called Inyosi or the Bee, her death-like head resting against the
thatch of the hut, and her death-like lips muttering "think of my word
when the great cat purrs above your face."

Then the brute put out its strength. The claws of one paw it drove deep
into the muscles of his left thigh, while with another it scratched at
his breast, tearing the clothes from it and furrowing the flesh beneath.
The sight of the white skin seemed to madden it, and in its fierce
desire for blood it drooped its square muzzle and buried its fangs in
its victim's shoulder. Next moment there was a sound of running feet and
of a club falling heavily. Up reared the leopard with an angry snarl,
up till it stood as high as the attacking Zulu. At him it came, striking
out savagely and tearing the black man as it had torn the white. Again
the kerry fell full on its jaws, and down it went backwards. Before it
could rise again, or rather as it was in the act of rising, the heavy
knob-stick struck it once more, and with fearful force, this time as
it chanced, full on the nape of the neck, and paralysing the brute. It
writhed and bit and twisted, throwing up the earth and leaves, while
blow after blow was rained upon it, till at length with a convulsive
struggle and a stifled roar it lay still--the brains oozing from its
shattered skull.

Hadden sat up, the blood running from his wounds.

"You have saved my life, Nahoon," he said faintly, "and I thank you."

"Do not thank me, Black Heart," answered the Zulu, "it was the king's
word that I should keep you safely. Still this tiger has been hardly
dealt with, for certainly he has saved my life," and lifting the
Martini he unloaded the rifle.

At this juncture Hadden swooned away.

*****

Twenty-four hours had gone by when, after what seemed to him to be but a
little time of troubled and dreamful sleep, through which he could hear
voices without understanding what they said, and feel himself borne he
knew not whither, Hadden awoke to find himself lying upon a kaross in
a large and beautifully clean Kaffir hut with a bundle of furs for a
pillow. There was a bowl of milk at his side and tortured as he was by
thirst, he tried to stretch out his arm to lift it to his lips, only to
find to his astonishment that his hand fell back to his side like that
of a dead man. Looking round the hut impatiently, he found that there
was nobody in it to assist him, so he did the only thing which remained
for him to do--he lay still. He did not fall asleep, but his eyes
closed, and a kind of gentle torpor crept over him, half obscuring his
recovered senses. Presently he heard a soft voice speaking; it seemed
far away, but he could clearly distinguish the words.

"Black Heart still sleeps," the voice said, "but there is colour in his
face; I think that he will wake soon, and find his thoughts again."

"Have no fear, Nanea, he will surely wake, his hurts are not dangerous,"
answered another voice, that of Nahoon. "He fell heavily with the weight
of the tiger on top of him, and that is why his senses have been shaken
for so long. He went near to death, but certainly he will not die."

"It would have been a pity if he had died," answered the soft voice, "he
is so beautiful; never have I seen a white man who was so beautiful."

"I did not think him beautiful when he stood with his rifle pointed at
my heart," answered Nahoon sulkily.

"Well, there is this to be said," she replied, "he wished to escape from
Cetywayo, and that is not to be wondered at," and she sighed. "Moreover
he asked you to come with him, and it might have been well if you had
done so, that is, if you would have taken me with you!"

"How could I have done it, girl?" he asked angrily. "Would you have me
set at nothing the order of the king?"

"The king!" she replied raising her voice. "What do you owe to this
king? You have served him faithfully, and your reward is that within a
few days he will take me from you--me, who should have been your wife,
and I must--I must----" And she began to weep softly, adding between
her sobs, "if you loved me truly, you would think more of me and of
yourself, and less of the Black One and his orders. Oh! let us fly,
Nahoon, let us fly to Natal before this spear pierces me."

"Weep not, Nanea," he said; "why do you tear my heart in two between my
duty and my love? You know that I am a soldier, and that I must walk the
path whereon the king has set my feet. Soon I think I shall be dead, for
I seek death, and then it will matter nothing."

"Nothing to you, Nahoon, who are at peace, but to me? Yet, you are
right, and I know it, therefore forgive me, who am no warrior, but a
woman who must also obey--the will of the king." And she cast her arms
about his neck, sobbing her fill upon his breast.



CHAPTER IV

NANEA

Presently, muttering something that the listener could not catch, Nahoon
left Nanea, and crept out of the hut by its bee-hole entrance. Then
Hadden opened his eyes and looked round him. The sun was sinking and
a ray of its red light streaming through the little opening filled the
place with a soft and crimson glow. In the centre of the hut--supporting
it--stood a thorn-wood roof-tree coloured black by the smoke of the
fire; and against this, the rich light falling full upon her, leaned the
girl Nanea--a very picture of gentle despair.

As is occasionally the case among Zulu women, she was beautiful--so
beautiful that the sight of her went straight to the white man's heart,
for a moment causing the breath to catch in his throat. Her dress was
very simple. On her shoulders, hanging open in front, lay a mantle of
soft white stuff edged with blue beads, about her middle was a buck-skin
moocha, also embroidered with blue beads, while round her forehead and
left knee were strips of grey fur, and on her right wrist a shining
bangle of copper. Her naked bronze-hued figure was tall and perfect in
its proportions; while her face had little in common with that of the
ordinary native girl, showing as it did strong traces of the ancestral
Arabian or Semitic blood. It was oval in shape, with delicate aquiline
features, arched eyebrows, a full mouth, that drooped a little at the
corners, tiny ears, behind which the wavy coal-black hair hung down to
the shoulders, and the very loveliest pair of dark and liquid eyes that
it is possible to imagine.

For a minute or more Nanea stood thus, her sweet face bathed in the
sunbeam, while Hadden feasted his eyes upon its beauty. Then sighing
heavily, she turned, and seeing that he was awake, started, drew her
mantle over her breast and came, or rather glided, towards him.

"The chief is awake," she said in her soft Zulu accents. "Does he need
aught?"

"Yes, Lady," he answered; "I need to drink, but alas! I am too weak."

She knelt down beside him, and supporting him with her left arm, with
her right held the gourd to his lips.

How it came about Hadden never knew, but before that draught was
finished a change passed over him. Whether it was the savage girl's
touch, or her strange and fawn-like loveliness, or the tender pity in
her eyes, matters not--the issue was the same. She struck some cord in
his turbulent uncurbed nature, and of a sudden it was filled full with
passion for her--a passion which if, not elevated, at least was real.
He did not for a moment mistake the significance of the flood of feeling
that surged through his veins. Hadden never shirked facts.

"By Heaven!" he said to himself, "I have fallen in love with a black
beauty at first sight--more in love than I have ever been before. It's
awkward, but there will be compensations. So much the worse for Nahoon,
or for Cetywayo, or for both of them. After all, I can always get rid of
her if she becomes a nuisance."

Then, in a fit of renewed weakness, brought about by the turmoil of his
blood, he lay back upon the pillow of furs, watching Nanea's face while
with a native salve of pounded leaves she busied herself dressing the
wounds that the leopard had made.

It almost seemed as though something of what was passing in his mind
communicated itself to that of the girl. At least, her hand shook a
little at her task, and getting done with it as quickly as she could,
she rose from her knees with a courteous "It is finished, Inkoos," and
once more took up her position by the roof-tree.

"I thank you, Lady," he said; "your hand is kind."

"You must not call me lady, Inkoos," she answered, "I am no
chieftainess, but only the daughter of a headman, Umgona."

"And named Nanea," he said. "Nay, do not be surprised, I have heard of
you. Well, Nanea, perhaps you will soon become a chieftainess--up at the
king's kraal yonder."

"Alas! and alas!" she said, covering her face with her hands.

"Do not grieve, Nanea, a hedge is never so tall and thick but that it
cannot be climbed or crept through."

She let fall her hands and looked at him eagerly, but he did not pursue
the subject.

"Tell me, how did I come here, Nanea?"

"Nahoon and his companions carried you, Inkoos."

"Indeed, I begin to be thankful to the leopard that struck me down.
Well, Nahoon is a brave man, and he has done me a great service. I trust
that I may be able to repay it--to you, Nanea."

*****

This was the first meeting of Nanea and Hadden; but, although she did
not seek them, the necessities of his sickness and of the situation
brought about many another. Never for a moment did the white man waver
in his determination to get into his keeping the native girl who had
captivated him, and to attain his end he brought to bear all his powers
and charm to detach her from Nahoon, and win her affections for himself.
He was no rough wooer, however, but proceeded warily, weaving her about
with a web of flattery and attention that must, he thought, produce the
desired effect upon her mind. Without a doubt, indeed, it would have
done so--for she was but a woman, and an untutored one--had it not been
for a simple fact which dominated her whole nature. She loved Nahoon,
and there was no room in her heart for any other man, white or black. To
Hadden she was courteous and kindly but no more, nor did she appear
to notice any of the subtle advances by which he attempted to win a
foothold in her heart. For a while this puzzled him, but he remembered
that the Zulu women do not usually permit themselves to show feeling
towards an undeclared suitor. Therefore it became necessary that he
should speak out.

His mind once made up, he had not to wait long for an opportunity. He
was now quite recovered from his hurts, and accustomed to walk in the
neighbourhood of the kraal. About two hundred yards from Umgona's huts
rose a spring, and thither it was Nanea's habit to resort in the evening
to bring back drinking-water for the use of her father's household.
The path between this spring and the kraal ran through a patch of bush,
where on a certain afternoon towards sundown Hadden took his seat under
a tree, having first seen Nanea go down to the little stream as was her
custom. A quarter of an hour later she reappeared carrying a large gourd
upon her head. She wore no garment now except her moocha, for she
had but one mantle and was afraid lest the water should splash it. He
watched her advancing along the path, her hands resting on her hips, her
splendid naked figure outlined against the westering sun, and wondered
what excuse he could make to talk with her. As it chanced fortune
favoured him, for when she was near him a snake glided across the path
in front of the girl's feet, causing her to spring backwards in alarm
and overset the gourd of water. He came forward, and picked it up.

"Wait here," he said laughing; "I will bring it to you full."

"Nay, Inkoos," she remonstrated, "that is a woman's work."

"Among my people," he said, "the men love to work for the women," and he
started for the spring, leaving her wondering.

Before he reached her again, he regretted his gallantry, for it was
necessary to carry the handleless gourd upon his shoulder, and the
contents of it spilling over the edge soaked him. Of this, however, he
said nothing to Nanea.

"There is your water, Nanea, shall I carry it for you to the kraal?"

"Nay, Inkoos, I thank you, but give it to me, you are weary with its
weight."

"Stay awhile, and I will accompany you. Ah! Nanea, I am still weak, and
had it not been for you I think that I should be dead."

"It was Nahoon who saved you--not I, Inkoos."

"Nahoon saved my body, but you, Nanea, you alone can save my heart."

"You talk darkly, Inkoos."

"Then I must make my meaning clear, Nanea. I love you."

She opened her brown eyes wide.

"You, a white lord, love me, a Zulu girl? How can that be?"

"I do not know, Nanea, but it is so, and were you not blind you would
have seen it. I love you, and I wish to take you to wife."

"Nay, Inkoos, it is impossible. I am already betrothed."

"Ay," he answered, "betrothed to the king."

"No, betrothed to Nahoon."

"But it is the king who will take you within a week; is it not so? And
would you not rather that I should take you than the king?"

"It seems to be so, Inkoos, and I would rather go with you than with
the king, but most of all I desire to marry Nahoon. It may be that I
shall not be able to marry him, but if that is so, at least I will never
become one of the king's women."

"How will you prevent it, Nanea?"

"There are waters in which a maid may drown, and trees upon which she
can hang," she answered with a quick setting of the mouth.

"That were a pity, Nanea, you are too fair to die."

"Fair or foul, yet I die, Inkoos."

"No, no, come with me--I will find a way--and be my wife," and he put
her arm about her waist, and strove to draw her to him.

Without any violence of movement, and with the most perfect dignity, the
girl disengaged herself from his embrace.

"You have honoured me, and I thank you, Inkoos," she said quietly,
"but you do not understand. I am the wife of Nahoon--I belong to Nahoon;
therefore, I cannot look on any other man while Nahoon lives. It is not
our custom, Inkoos, for we are not as the white women, but ignorant
and simple, and when we vow ourselves to a man, we abide by that vow
till death."

"Indeed," said Hadden; "and so now you go to tell Nahoon that I have
offered to make you my wife."

"No, Inkoos, why should I tell Nahoon your secrets? I have said 'nay'
to you, not 'yea,' therefore he has no right to know," and she stooped
to lift the gourd of water.

Hadden considered the situation rapidly, for his repulse only made
him the more determined to succeed. Of a sudden under the emergency
he conceived a scheme, or rather its rough outline. It was not a
nice scheme, and some men might have shrunk from it, but as he had
no intention of suffering himself to be defeated by a Zulu girl, he
decided--with regret, it is true--that having failed to attain his ends
by means which he considered fair, he must resort to others of more
doubtful character.

"Nanea," he said, "you are a good and honest woman, and I respect you.
As I have told you, I love you also, but if you refuse to listen to me
there is nothing more to be said, and after all, perhaps it would be
better that you should marry one of your own people. But, Nanea, you
will never marry him, for the king will take you; and, if he does not
give you to some other man, either you will become one of his 'sisters,'
or to be free of him, as you say, you will die. Now hear me, for it is
because I love you and wish your welfare that I speak thus. Why do you
not escape into Natal, taking Nahoon with you, for there as you know you
may live in peace out of reach of the arm of Cetywayo?"

"That is my desire, Inkoos, but Nahoon will not consent. He says that
there is to be war between us and you white men, and he will not break
the command of the king and desert from his army."

"Then he cannot love you much, Nahoon, and at least you have to think of
yourself. Whisper into the ear of your father and fly together, for be
sure that Nahoon will soon follow you. Ay! and I myself with fly with
you, for I too believe that there must be war, and then a white man in
this country will be as a lamb among the eagles."

"If Nahoon will come, I will go, Inkoos, but I cannot fly without
Nahoon; it is better I should stay here and kill myself."

"Surely then being so fair and loving him so well, you can teach him
to forget his folly and to escape with you. In four days' time we must
start for the king's kraal, and if you win over Nahoon, it will be
easy for us to turn our faces southwards and across the river that lies
between the land of the Amazulu and Natal. For the sake of all of us,
but most of all for your own sake, try to do this, Nanea, whom I have
loved and whom I now would save. See him and plead with him as you
know how, but as yet do not tell him that I dream of flight, for then I
should be watched."

"In truth, I will, Inkoos," she answered earnestly, "and oh! I thank
you for your goodness. Fear not that I will betray you--first would I
die. Farewell."

"Farewell, Nanea," and taking her hand he raised it to his lips.

*****

Late that night, just as Hadden was beginning to prepare himself for
sleep, he heard a gentle tapping at the board which closed the entrance
to his hut.

"Enter," he said, unfastening the door, and presently by the light of
the little lantern that he had with him, he saw Nanea creep into the
hut, followed by the great form of Nahoon.

"Inkoos," she said in a whisper when the door was closed again, "I
have pleaded with Nahoon, and he has consented to fly; moreover, my
father will come also."

"Is it so, Nahoon?" asked Hadden.

"It is so," answered the Zulu, looking down shamefacedly; "to save this
girl from the king, and because the love of her eats out my heart, I
have bartered away my honour. But I tell you, Nanea, and you, White
Man, as I told Umgona just now, that I think no good will come of this
flight, and if we are caught or betrayed, we shall be killed every one
of us."

"Caught we can scarcely be," broke in Nanea anxiously, "for who could
betray us, except the Inkoos here----"

"Which he is not likely to do," said Hadden quietly, "seeing that he
desires to escape with you, and that his life is also at stake."

"That is so, Black Heart," said Nahoon, "otherwise I tell you that I
should not have trusted you."

Hadden took no notice of this outspoken saying, but until very late that
night they sat there together making their plans.

*****

On the following morning Hadden was awakened by sounds of violent
altercation. Going out of his hut he found that the disputants were
Umgona and a fat and evil-looking Kaffir chief who had arrived at the
kraal on a pony. This chief, he soon discovered, was named Maputa, being
none other than the man who had sought Nanea in marriage and brought
about Nahoon's and Umgona's unfortunate appeal to the king. At present
he was engaged in abusing Umgona furiously, charging him with having
stolen certain of his oxen and bewitched his cows so that they would not
give milk. The alleged theft it was comparatively easy to disprove, but
the wizardry remained a matter of argument.

"You are a dog, and a son of a dog," shouted Maputa, shaking his fat
fist in the face of the trembling but indignant Umgona. "You promised
me your daughter in marriage, then having vowed her to that
umfagozan--that low lout of a soldier, Nahoon, the son of Zomba--you
went, the two of you, and poisoned the king's ear against me, bringing
me into trouble with the king, and now you have bewitched my cattle.
Well, wait, I will be even with you, Wizard; wait till you wake up
in the cold morning to find your fence red with fire, and the slayers
standing outside your gates to eat up you and yours with spears----"

At this juncture Nahoon, who till now had been listening in silence,
intervened with effect.

"Good," he said, "we will wait, but not in your company, Chief Maputa.
Hamba! (go)----" and seizing the fat old ruffian by the scruff of his
neck, he flung him backwards with such violence that he rolled over and
over down the little slope.

Hadden laughed, and passed on towards the stream where he proposed to
bathe. Just as he reached it, he caught sight of Maputa riding along the
footpath, his head-ring covered with mud, his lips purple and his black
face livid with rage.

"There goes an angry man," he said to himself. "Now, how would it
be----" and he looked upwards like one seeking an inspiration. It seemed
to come; perhaps the devil finding it open whispered in his ear, at any
rate--in a few seconds his plan was formed, and he was walking through
the bush to meet Maputa.

"Go in peace, Chief," he said; "they seem to have treated you roughly up
yonder. Having no power to interfere, I came away for I could not bear
the sight. It is indeed shameful that an old and venerable man of rank
should be struck into the dirt, and beaten by a soldier drunk with
beer."

"Shameful, White Man!" gasped Maputa; "your words are true indeed. But
wait a while. I, Maputa, will roll that stone over, I will throw that
bull upon its back. When next the harvest ripens, this I promise, that
neither Nahoon nor Umgona, nor any of his kraal shall be left to gather
it."

"And how will you manage that, Maputa?"

"I do not know, but I will find a way. Oh! I tell you, a way shall be
found."

Hadden patted the pony's neck meditatively, then leaning forward, he
looked the chief in the eyes and said:--

"What will you give me, Maputa, if I show you that way, a sure and
certain one, whereby you may be avenged to the death upon Nahoon, whose
violence I also have seen, and upon Umgona, whose witchcraft brought
sore sickness upon me?"

"What reward do you seek, White Man?" asked Maputa eagerly.

"A little thing, Chief, a thing of no account, only the girl Nanea, to
whom as it chances I have taken a fancy."

"I wanted her for myself, White Man, but he who sits at Ulundi has laid
his hand upon her."

"That is nothing, Chief; I can arrange with him who 'sits at Ulundi.' It
is with you who are great here that I wish to come to terms. Listen: if
you grant my desire, not only will I fulfil yours upon your foes, but
when the girl is delivered into my hands I will give you this rifle and
a hundred rounds of cartridges."

Maputa looked at the sporting Martini, and his eyes glistened.

"It is good," he said; "it is very good. Often have I wished for such a
gun that will enable me to shoot game, and to talk with my enemies from
far away. Promise it to me, White Man, and you shall take the girl if I
can give her to you."

"You swear it, Maputa?"

"I swear it by the head of Chaka, and the spirits of my fathers."

"Good. At dawn on the fourth day from now it is the purpose of Umgona,
his daughter Nanea, and Nahoon, to cross the river into Natal by the
drift that is called Crocodile Drift, taking their cattle with them and
flying from the king. I also shall be of their company, for they know
that I have learned their secret, and would murder me if I tried to
leave them. Now you who are chief of the border and guardian of that
drift, must hide at night with some men among the rocks in the shallows
of the drift and await our coming. First Nanea will cross driving the
cows and calves, for so it is arranged, and I shall help her; then will
follow Umgona and Nahoon with the oxen and heifers. On these two you
must fall, killing them and capturing the cattle, and afterwards I will
give you the rifle."

"What if the king should ask for the girl, White Man?"

"Then you shall answer that in the uncertain light you did not recognise
her and so she slipped away from you; moreover, that at first you feared
to seize the girl lest her cries should alarm the men and they should
escape you."

"Good, but how can I be sure that you will give me the gun once you are
across the river?"

"Thus: before I enter the ford I will lay the rifle and cartridges upon
a stone by the bank, telling Nanea that I shall return to fetch them
when I have driven over the cattle."

"It is well, White Man; I will not fail you."

So the plot was made, and after some further conversation upon points of
detail, the two conspirators shook hands and parted.

"That ought to come off all right," reflected Hadden to himself as he
plunged and floated in the waters of the stream, "but somehow I don't
quite trust our friend Maputa. It would have been better if I could
have relied upon myself to get rid of Nahoon and his respected uncle--a
couple of shots would do it in the water. But then that would be murder
and murder is unpleasant; whereas the other thing is only the delivery
to justice of two base deserters, a laudable action in a military
country. Also personal interference upon my part might turn the girl
against me; while after Umgona and Nahoon have been wiped out by Maputa,
she must accept my escort. Of course there is a risk, but in every
walk of life the most cautious have to take risks at times."

As it chanced, Philip Hadden was correct in his suspicions of his
coadjutor, Maputa. Even before that worthy chief reached his own
kraal, he had come to the conclusion that the white man's plan, though
attractive in some ways, was too dangerous, since it was certain that if
the girl Nanea escaped, the king would be indignant. Moreover, the men
he took with him to do the killing in the drift would suspect something
and talk. On the other hand he would earn much credit with his majesty
by revealing the plot, saying that he had learned it from the lips of
the white hunter, whom Umgona and Nahoon had forced to participate
in it, and of whose coveted rifle he must trust to chance to possess
himself.

*****

An hour later two discreet messengers were bounding across the plains,
bearing words from the Chief Maputa, the Warden of the Border, to the
"great Black Elephant" at Ulundi.



CHAPTER V

THE DOOM POOL

Fortune showed itself strangely favourable to the plans of Nahoon and
Nanea. One of the Zulu captain's perplexities was as to how he should
lull the suspicions and evade the vigilance of his own companions, who
together with himself had been detailed by the king to assist Hadden in
his hunting and to guard against his escape. As it chanced, however, on
the day after the incident of the visit of Maputa, a messenger arrived
from no less a person than the great military Induna, Tvingwayo ka
Marolo, who afterwards commanded the Zulu army at Isandhlwana, ordering
these men to return to their regiment, the Umcityu Corps, which was to
be placed upon full war footing. Accordingly Nahoon sent them, saying
that he himself would follow with Black Heart in the course of a few
days, as at present the white man was not sufficiently recovered from
his hurts to allow of his travelling fast and far. So the soldiers went,
doubting nothing.

Then Umgona gave it out that in obedience to the command of the king he
was about to start for Ulundi, taking with him his daughter Nanea to
be delivered over into the Sigodhla, and also those fifteen head
of cattle that had been lobola'd by Nahoon in consideration of his
forthcoming marriage, whereof he had been fined by Cetywayo. Under
pretence that they required a change of veldt, the rest of his cattle
he sent away in charge of a Basuto herd who knew nothing of their plans,
telling him to keep them by the Crocodile Drift, as there the grass was
good and sweet.

All preparations being completed, on the third day the party started,
heading straight for Ulundi. After they had travelled some miles,
however, they left the road and turning sharp to the right, passed
unobserved of any through a great stretch of uninhabited bush. Their
path now lay not far from the Pool of Doom, which, indeed, was close to
Umgona's kraal, and the forest that was called Home of the Dead, but out
of sight of these. It was their plan to travel by night, reaching the
broken country near the Crocodile Drift on the following morning. Here
they proposed to lie hid that day and through the night; then, having
first collected the cattle which had preceded them, to cross the river
at the break of dawn and escape into Natal. At least this was the
plan of his companions; but, as we know, Hadden had another programme,
whereon after one last appearance two of the party would play no part.

During that long afternoon's journey Umgona, who knew every inch of the
country, walked ahead driving the fifteen cattle and carrying in his
hand a long travelling stick of black and white umzimbeet wood, for in
truth the old man was in a hurry to reach his journey's end. Next came
Nahoon, armed with a broad assegai, but naked except for his moocha and
necklet of baboon's teeth, and with him Nanea in her white bead-bordered
mantle. Hadden, who brought up the rear, noticed that the girl seemed
to be under the spell of an imminent apprehension, for from time to time
she clasped her lover's arm, and looking up into his face, addressed him
with vehemence, almost with passion.

Curiously enough, the sight touched Hadden, and once or twice he was
shaken by so sharp a pang of remorse at the thought of his share in this
tragedy, that he cast about in his mind seeking a means to unravel the
web of death which he himself had woven. But ever that evil voice was
whispering at his ear. It reminded him that he, the white Inkoos, had
been refused by this dusky beauty, and that if he found a way to save
him, within some few hours she would be the wife of the savage gentleman
at her side, the man who had named him Black Heart and who despised
him, the man whom he had meant to murder and who immediately repaid his
treachery by rescuing him from the jaws of the leopard at the risk of
his own life. Moreover, it was a law of Hadden's existence never to deny
himself of anything that he desired if it lay within his power to take
it--a law which had led him always deeper into sin. In other respects,
indeed, it had not carried him far, for in the past he had not desired
much, and he had won little; but this particular flower was to his hand,
and he would pluck it. If Nahoon stood between him and the flower, so
much the worse for Nahoon, and if it should wither in his grasp, so much
the worse for the flower; it could always be thrown away. Thus it came
about that, not for the first time in his life, Philip Hadden discarded
the somewhat spasmodic prickings of conscience and listened to that evil
whispering at his ear.

About half-past five o'clock in the afternoon the four refugees passed
the stream that a mile or so down fell over the little precipice into
the Doom Pool; and, entering a patch of thorn trees on the further side,
walked straight into the midst of two-and-twenty soldiers, who were
beguiling the tedium of expectancy by the taking of snuff and the
smoking of dakka or native hemp. With these soldiers, seated on his
pony, for he was too fat to walk, waited the Chief Maputa.

Observing that their expected guests had arrived, the men knocked out
the dakka pipe, replaced the snuff boxes in the slits made in the
lobes of their ears, and secured the four of them.

"What is the meaning of this, O King's soldiers?" asked Umgona in a
quavering voice. "We journey to the kraal of U'Cetywayo; why do you
molest us?"

"Indeed. Wherefore then are your faces set towards the south. Does the
Black One live in the south? Well, you will journey to another kraal
presently," answered the jovial-looking captain of the party with a
callous laugh.

"I do not understand," stammered Umgona.

"Then I will explain while you rest," said the captain. "The Chief
Maputa yonder sent word to the Black One at Ulundi that he had learned
of your intended flight to Natal from the lips of this white man, who
had warned him of it. The Black One was angry, and despatched us to
catch you and make an end of you. That is all. Come on now, quietly, and
let us finish the matter. As the Doom Pool is near, your deaths will be
easy."

Nahoon heard the words, and sprang straight at the throat of Hadden; but
he did not reach it, for the soldiers pulled him down. Nanea heard them
also, and turning, looked the traitor in the eyes; she said nothing, she
only looked, but he could never forget that look. The white man for his
part was filled with a fiery indignation against Maputa.

"You wicked villain," he gasped, whereat the chief smiled in a sickly
fashion, and turned away.

Then they were marched along the banks of the stream till they reached
the waterfall that fell into the Pool of Doom.

Hadden was a brave man after his fashion, but his heart quailed as he
gazed into that abyss.

"Are you going to throw me in there?" he asked of the Zulu captain in a
thick voice.

"You, White Man?" replied the soldier unconcernedly. "No, our orders
are to take you to the king, but what he will do with you I do not know.
There is to be war between your people and ours, so perhaps he means to
pound you into medicine for the use of the witch-doctors, or to peg you
over an ant-heap as a warning to other white men."

Hadden received this information in silence, but its effect upon his
brain was bracing, for instantly he began to search out some means of
escape.

By now the party had halted near the two thorn trees that hung over the
waters of the pool.

"Who dives first," asked the captain of the Chief Maputa.

"The old wizard," he replied, nodding at Umgona; "then his daughter
after him, and last of all this fellow," and he struck Nahoon in the
face with his open hand.

"Come on, Wizard," said the captain, grasping Umgona by the arm, "and
let us see how you can swim."

At the words of doom Umgona seemed to recover his self-command, after
the fashion of his race.

"No need to lead me, soldier," he said, shaking himself loose, "who am
old and ready to die." Then he kissed his daughter at his side, wrung
Nahoon by the hand, and turning from Hadden with a gesture of contempt
walked out upon the platform that joined the two thorn trunks. Here
he stood for a moment looking at the setting sun, then suddenly, and
without a sound, he hurled himself into the abyss below and vanished.

"That was a brave one," said the captain with admiration. "Can you
spring too, girl, or must we throw you?"

"I can walk my father's path," Nanea answered faintly, "but first I
crave leave to say one word. It is true that we were escaping from the
king, and therefore by the law we must die; but it was Black Heart here
who made the plot, and he who has betrayed us. Would you know why he has
betrayed us? Because he sought my favour, and I refused him, and this is
the vengeance that he takes--a white man's vengeance."

"Wow!" broke in the chief Maputa, "this pretty one speaks truth, for
the white man would have made a bargain with me under which Umgona,
the wizard, and Nahoon, the soldier, were to be killed at the Crocodile
Drift, and he himself suffered to escape with the girl. I spoke him
softly and said 'yes,' and then like a loyal man I reported to the
king."

"You hear," sighed Nanea. "Nahoon, fare you well, though presently
perhaps we shall be together again. It was I who tempted you from your
duty. For my sake you forgot your honour, and I am repaid. Farewell,
my husband, it is better to die with you than to enter the house of the
king's women," and Nanea stepped on to the platform.

Here, holding to a bough of one of the thorn trees, she turned and
addressed Hadden, saying:--

"Black Heart, you seem to have won the day, but me at least you lose
and--the sun is not yet set. After sunset comes the night, Black Heart,
and in that night I pray that you may wander eternally, and be given to
drink of my blood and the blood of Umgona my father, and the blood of
Nahoon my husband, who saved your life, and whom you have murdered.
Perchance, Black Heart, we may yet meet yonder--in the House of the
Dead."

Then uttering a low cry Nanea clasped her hands and sprang upwards and
outwards from the platform. The watchers bent their heads forward to
look. They saw her rush headlong down the face of the fall to strike
the water fifty feet below. A few seconds, and for the last time, they
caught sight of her white garment glimmering on the surface of the
gloomy pool. Then the shadows and mist-wreaths hid it, and she was gone.

"Now, husband," cried the cheerful voice of the captain, "yonder is your
marriage bed, so be swift to follow a bride who is so ready to lead the
way. Wow! but you are good people to kill; never have I had to do with
any who gave less trouble. You----" and he stopped, for mental agony had
done its work, and suddenly Nahoon went mad before his eyes.

With a roar like that of a lion the great man cast off those who held
him and seizing one of them round the waist and thigh, he put out all
his terrible strength. Lifting him as though he had been an infant, he
hurled him over the edge of the cliff to find his death on the rocks of
the Pool of Doom. Then crying:--

"Black Heart! your turn, Black Heart the traitor!" he rushed at Hadden,
his eyes rolling and foam flying from his lips, as he passed striking
the chief Maputa from his horse with a backward blow of his hand. Ill
would it have gone with the white man if Nahoon had caught him. But
he could not come at him, for the soldiers sprang upon him and
notwithstanding his fearful struggles they pulled him to the ground, as
at certain festivals the Zulu regiments with their naked hands pull down
a bull in the presence of the king.

"Cast him over before he can work more mischief," said a voice. But the
captain cried out, "Nay, nay, he is sacred; the fire from Heaven has
fallen on his brain, and we may not harm him, else evil would overtake
us all. Bind him hand and foot, and bear him tenderly to where he can
be cared for. Surely I thought that these evil-doers were giving us too
little trouble, and thus it has proved."

So they set themselves to make fast Nahoon's hands and wrists, using
as much gentleness as they might, for among the Zulus a lunatic is
accounted holy. It was no easy task, and it took time.

Hadden glanced around him, and saw his opportunity. On the ground close
beside him lay his rifle, where one of the soldiers had placed it,
and about a dozen yards away Maputa's pony was grazing. With a swift
movement, he seized the Martini and five seconds later he was on the
back of the pony, heading for the Crocodile Drift at a gallop. So
quickly indeed did he execute this masterly retreat, that occupied as
they all were in binding Nahoon, for half a minute or more none of the
soldiers noticed what had happened. Then Maputa chanced to see, and
waddled after him to the top of the rise, screaming:--

"The white thief, he has stolen my horse, and the gun too, the gun that
he promised to give me."

Hadden, who by this time was a hundred yards away, heard him clearly,
and a rage filled his heart. This man had made an open murderer of him;
more, he had been the means of robbing him of the girl for whose sake he
had dipped his hands in these iniquities. He glanced over his shoulder;
Maputa was still running, and alone. Yes, there was time; at any rate he
would risk it.

Pulling up the pony with a jerk, he leapt from its back, slipping
his arm through the rein with an almost simultaneous movement. As it
chanced, and as he had hoped would be the case, the animal was a trained
shooting horse, and stood still. Hadden planted his feet firmly on the
ground and drawing a deep breath, he cocked the rifle and covered the
advancing chief. Now Maputa saw his purpose and with a yell of terror
turned to fly. Hadden waited a second to get the sight fair on his broad
back, then just as the soldiers appeared above the rise he pressed the
trigger. He was a noted shot, and in this instance his skill did not
fail him; for, before he heard the bullet tell, Maputa flung his arms
wide and plunged to the ground dead.

Three seconds more, and with a savage curse, Hadden had remounted the
pony and was riding for his life towards the river, which a while later
he crossed in safety.



CHAPTER VI

THE GHOST OF THE DEAD

When Nanea leapt from the dizzy platform that overhung the Pool of Doom,
a strange fortune befell her. Close in to the precipice were many jagged
rocks, and on these the waters of the fall fell and thundered, bounding
from them in spouts of spray into the troubled depths of the foss
beyond. It was on these stones that the life was dashed out from the
bodies of the wretched victims who were hurled from above. But Nanea, it
will be remembered, had not waited to be treated thus, and as it chanced
the strong spring with which she had leapt to death carried her clear of
the rocks. By a very little she missed the edge of them and striking the
deep water head first like some practised diver, she sank down and down
till she thought that she would never rise again. Yet she did rise,
at the end of the pool in the mouth of the rapid, along which she sped
swiftly, carried down by the rush of the water. Fortunately there were
no rocks here; and, since she was a skilful swimmer, she escaped the
danger of being thrown against the banks.

For a long distance she was borne thus till at length she saw that she
was in a forest, for trees cut off the light from the water, and their
drooping branches swept its surface. One of these Nanea caught with her
hand, and by the help of it she dragged herself from the River of Death
whence none had escaped before. Now she stood upon the bank gasping
but quite unharmed; there was not a scratch on her body; even her white
garment was still fast about her neck.

But though she had suffered no hurt in her terrible voyage, so exhausted
was Nanea that she could scarcely stand. Here the gloom was that of
night, and shivering with cold she looked helplessly to find some
refuge. Close to the water's edge grew an enormous yellow-wood tree,
and to this she staggered--thinking to climb it, and seek shelter in its
boughs where, as she hoped, she would be safe from wild beasts. Again
fortune befriended her, for at a distance of a few feet from the ground
there was a great hole in the tree which, she discovered, was hollow.
Into this hole she crept, taking her chance of its being the home of
snakes or other evil creatures, to find that the interior was wide and
warm. It was dry also, for at the bottom of the cavity lay a foot or
more of rotten tinder and moss brought there by rats or birds. Upon this
tinder she lay down, and covering herself with the moss and leaves soon
sank into sleep or stupor.

How long Nanea slept she did not know, but at length she was awakened by
a sound as of guttural human voices talking in a language that she could
not understand. Rising to her knees she peered out of the hole in the
tree. It was night, but the stars shone brilliantly, and their light
fell upon an open circle of ground close by the edge of the river. In
this circle there burned a great fire, and at a little distance from the
fire were gathered eight or ten horrible-looking beings, who appeared to
be rejoicing over something that lay upon the ground. They were small in
stature, men and women together, but no children, and all of them were
nearly naked. Their hair was long and thin, growing down almost to the
eyes, their jaws and teeth protruded and the girth of their black bodies
was out of all proportion to their height. In their hands they held
sticks with sharp stones lashed on to them, or rude hatchet-like knives
of the same material.

Now Nanea's heart shrank within her, and she nearly fainted with fear,
for she knew that she was in the haunted forest, and without a doubt
these were the Esemkofu, the evil ghosts that dwelt therein. Yes, that
was what they were, and yet she could not take her eyes off them--the
sight of them held her with a horrible fascination. But if they were
ghosts, why did they sing and dance like men? Why did they wave those
sharp stones aloft, and quarrel and strike each other? And why did they
make a fire as men do when they wish to cook food? More, what was it
that they rejoiced over, that long dark thing which lay so quiet upon
the ground? It did not look like a head of game, and it could scarcely
be a crocodile, yet clearly it was food of some sort, for they were
sharpening the stone knives in order to cut it up.

While she wondered thus, one of the dreadful-looking little creatures
advanced to the fire, and taking from it a burning bough, held it over
the thing that lay upon the ground, to give light to a companion who
was about to do something to it with the stone knife. Next instant Nanea
drew back her head from the hole, a stifled shriek upon her lips. She
saw what it was now--it was the body of a man. Yes, and these were no
ghosts; they were cannibals of whom when she was little, her mother had
told her tales to keep her from wandering away from home.

But who was the man they were about to eat? It could not be one of
themselves, for his stature was much greater. Oh! now she knew; it must
be Nahoon, who had been killed up yonder, and whose dead body the waters
had brought down to the haunted forest as they had brought her alive.
Yes, it must be Nahoon, and she would be forced to see her husband
devoured before her eyes. The thought of it overwhelmed her. That he
should die by order of the king was natural, but that he should be
buried thus! Yet what could she do to prevent it? Well, if it cost her
her life, it should be prevented. At the worst they could only kill
and eat her also, and now that Nahoon and her father were gone, being
untroubled by any religious or spiritual hopes and fears, she was not
greatly concerned to keep her own breath in her.

Slipping through the hole in the tree, Nanea walked quietly towards the
cannibals--not knowing in the least what she should do when she reached
them. As she arrived in line with the fire this lack of programme came
home to her mind forcibly, and she paused to reflect. Just then one of
the cannibals looked up to see a tall and stately figure wrapped in a
white garment which, as the flame-light flickered on it, seemed now to
advance from the dense background of shadow, and now to recede into it.
The poor savage wretch was holding a stone knife in his teeth when he
beheld her, but it did not remain there long, for opening his great
jaws he uttered the most terrified and piercing yell that Nanea had
ever heard. Then the others saw her also, and presently the forest was
ringing with shrieks of fear. For a few seconds the outcasts stood
and gazed, then they were gone this way and that, bursting their path
through the undergrowth like startled jackals. The Esemkofu of Zulu
tradition had been routed in their own haunted home by what they took to
be a spirit.

Poor Esemkofu! they were but miserable and starving bushmen who,
driven into that place of ill omen many years ago, had adopted this
means, the only one open to them, to keep the life in their wretched
bodies. Here at least they were unmolested, and as there was little
other food to be found amid that wilderness of trees, they took what the
river brought them. When executions were few in the Pool of Doom, times
were hard for them indeed--for then they were driven to eat each other.
That is why there were no children.

As their inarticulate outcry died away in the distance, Nanea ran
forward to look at the body that lay on the ground, and staggered back
with a sigh of relief. It was not Nahoon, but she recognised the face
for that of one of the party of executioners. How did he come here? Had
Nahoon killed him? Had Nahoon escaped? She could not tell, and at the
best it was improbable, but still the sight of this dead soldier lit her
heart with a faint ray of hope, for how did he come to be dead if Nahoon
had no hand in his death? She could not bear to leave him lying so near
her hiding-place, however; therefore, with no small toil, she rolled
the corpse back into the water, which carried it swiftly away. Then she
returned to the tree, having first replenished the fire, and awaited the
light.

At last it came--so much of it as ever penetrated this darksome den--and
Nanea, becoming aware that she was hungry, descended from the tree
to search for food. All day long she searched, finding nothing, till
towards sunset she remembered that on the outskirts of the forest there
was a flat rock where it was the custom of those who had been in any
way afflicted, or who considered themselves or their belongings to
be bewitched, to place propitiatory offerings of food wherewith the
Esemkofu and Amalhosi were supposed to satisfy their spiritual
cravings. Urged by the pinch of starvation, to this spot Nanea journeyed
rapidly, and found to her joy that some neighbouring kraal had evidently
been in recent trouble, for the Rock of Offering was laden with cobs of
corn, gourds of milk, porridge and even meat. Helping herself to as much
as she could carry, she returned to her lair, where she drank of the
milk and cooked meat and mealies at the fire. Then she crept back into
the tree, and slept.

For nearly two months Nanea lived thus in the forest, since she could
not venture out of it--fearing lest she should be seized, and for a
second time taste of the judgment of the king. In the forest at least
she was safe, for none dared enter there, nor did the Esemkofu give
her further trouble. Once or twice she saw them, but on each occasion
they fled from her presence--seeking some distant retreat, where they
hid themselves or perished. Nor did food fail her, for finding that
it was taken, the pious givers brought it in plenty to the Rock of
Offering.

But, oh! the life was dreadful, and the gloom and loneliness coupled
with her sorrows at times drove her almost to insanity. Still she lived
on, though often she desired to die, for if her father was dead, the
corpse she had found was not the corpse of Nahoon, and in her heart
there still shone that spark of home. Yet what she hoped for she could
not tell.

*****

When Philip Hadden reached civilised regions, he found that war was
about to be declared between the Queen and Cetywayo, King of the
Amazulu; also that in the prevailing excitement his little adventure
with the Utrecht store-keeper had been overlooked or forgotten. He was
the owner of two good buck-waggons with spans of salted oxen, and at
that time vehicles were much in request to carry military stores for
the columns which were to advance into Zululand; indeed the transport
authorities were glad to pay £90 a month for the hire of each waggon and
to guarantee the owners against all loss of cattle. Although he was not
desirous of returning to Zululand, this bait proved too much for Hadden,
who accordingly leased out his waggons to the Commissariat, together
with his own services as conductor and interpreter.

He was attached to No. 3 column of the invading force, which it may be
remembered was under the immediate command of Lord Chelmsford, and on
the 20th of January, 1879, he marched with it by the road that runs from
Rorke's Drift to the Indeni forest, and encamped that night beneath the
shadow of the steep and desolate mountain known as Isandhlwana.

That day also a great army of King Cetywayo's, numbering twenty thousand
men and more, moved down from the Upindo Hill and camped upon the stony
plain that lies a mile and a half to the east of Isandhlwana. No fires
were lit, and it lay there in utter silence, for the warriors were
"sleeping on their spears."

With that impi was the Umcityu regiment, three thousand five hundred
strong. At the first break of dawn the Induna in command of the Umcityu
looked up from beneath the shelter of the black shield with which he had
covered his body, and through the thick mist he saw a great man standing
before him, clothed only in a moocha, a gaunt wild-eyed man who held a
rough club in his hand. When he was spoken to, the man made no answer;
he only leaned upon his club looking from left to right along the dense
array of innumerable shields.

"Who is this Silwana (wild creature)?" asked the Induna of his
captains wondering.

The captains stared at the wanderer, and one of them replied, "This is
Nahoon-ka-Zomba, it is the son of Zomba who not long ago held rank in
this regiment of the Umcityu. His betrothed, Nanea, daughter of Umgona,
was killed together with her father by order of the Black One, and
Nahoon went mad with grief at the sight of it, for the fire of Heaven
entered his brain, and mad he has wandered ever since."

"What would you here, Nahoon-ka-Zomba?" asked the Induna.

Then Nahoon spoke slowly. "My regiment goes down to war against the
white men; give me a shield and a spear, O Captain of the king, that I
may fight with my regiment, for I seek a face in the battle."

So they gave him a shield and a spear, for they dared not turn away one
whose brain was alight with the fire of Heaven.

*****

When the sun was high that day, bullets began to fall among the ranks
of the Umcityu. Then the black-shielded, black-plumed Umcityu arose,
company by company, and after them arose the whole vast Zulu army,
breast and horns together, and swept down in silence upon the doomed
British camp, a moving sheen of spears. The bullets pattered on the
shields, the shells tore long lines through their array, but they never
halted or wavered. Forward on either side shot out the horns of armed
men, clasping the camp in an embrace of steel. Then as these began
to close, out burst the war cry of the Zulus, and with the roar of a
torrent and the rush of a storm, with a sound like the humming of a
billion bees, wave after wave the deep breast of the impi rolled down
upon the white men. With it went the black-shielded Umcityu and with
them went Nahoon, the son of Zomba. A bullet struck him in the side,
glancing from his ribs, he did not heed; a white man fell from his horse
before him, he did not stab, for he sought but one face in the battle.

He sought--and at last he found. There, among the waggons where the
spears were busiest, there standing by his horse and firing rapidly
was Black Heart, he who had given Nanea his betrothed to death. Three
soldiers stood between them, one of them Nahoon stabbed, and two he
brushed aside; then he rushed straight at Hadden.

But the white man saw him come, and even through the mask of his madness
he knew Nahoon again, and terror took hold of him. Throwing away his
empty rifle, for his ammunition was spent, he leaped upon his horse
and drove his spurs into its flanks. Away it went among the carnage,
springing over the dead and bursting through the lines of shields, and
after it came Nahoon, running long and low with head stretched forward
and trailing spear, running as a hound runs when the buck is at view.

Hadden's first plan was to head for Rorke's Drift, but a glance to the
left showed him that the masses of the Undi barred that way, so he fled
straight on, leaving his path to fortune. In five minutes he was over a
ridge, and there was nothing of the battle to be seen, in ten all
sounds of it had died away, for few guns were fired in the dread race
to Fugitive's Drift, and the assegai makes no noise. In some strange
fashion, even at this moment, the contrast between the dreadful scene of
blood and turmoil that he had left, and the peaceful face of Nature over
which he was passing, came home to his brain vividly. Here birds sang
and cattle grazed; here the sun shone undimmed by the smoke of cannon,
only high up in the blue and silent air long streams of vultures could
be seen winging their way to the Plain of Isandhlwana.

The ground was very rough, and Hadden's horse began to tire. He looked
over his shoulder--there some two hundred yards behind came the Zulu,
grim as Death, unswerving as Fate. He examined the pistol in his belt;
there was but one undischarged cartridge left, all the rest had been
fired and the pouch was empty. Well, one bullet should be enough for
one savage: the question was should he stop and use it now? No, he might
miss or fail to kill the man; he was on horseback and his foe on foot,
surely he could tire him out.

A while passed, and they dashed through a little stream. It seemed
familiar to Hadden. Yes, that was the pool where he used to bathe when
he was the guest of Umgona, the father of Nanea; and there on the knoll
to his right were the huts, or rather the remains of them, for they
had been burnt with fire. What chance had brought him to this place, he
wondered; then again he looked behind him at Nahoon, who seemed to read
his thoughts, for he shook his spear and pointed to the ruined kraal.

On he went at speed for here the land was level, and to his joy he lost
sight of his pursuer. But presently there came a mile of rocky ground,
and when it was past, glancing back he saw that Nahoon was once more in
his old place. His horse's strength was almost spent, but Hadden spurred
it forward blindly, whither he knew not. Now he was travelling along a
strip of turf and ahead of him he heard the music of a river, while to
his left rose a high bank. Presently the turf bent inwards and there,
not twenty yards away from him, was a Kaffir hut standing on the brink
of a river. He looked at it, yes, it was the hut of that accursed
inyanga, the Bee, and standing by the fence of it was none other
than the Bee herself. At the sight of her the exhausted horse swerved
violently, stumbled and came to the ground, where it lay panting. Hadden
was thrown from the saddle but sprang to his feet unhurt.

"Ah! Black Heart, is it you? What news of the battle, Black Heart?"
cried the Bee in a mocking voice.

"Help me, mother, I am pursued," he gasped.

"What of it, Black Heart, it is but by one tired man. Stand then and
face him, for now Black Heart and White Heart are together again. You
will not? Then away to the forest and seek shelter among the dead who
await you there. Tell me, tell me, was it the face of Nanea that I saw
beneath the waters a while ago? Good! bear my greetings to her when you
two meet in the House of the Dead."

Hadden looked at the stream; it was in flood. He could not swim it,
so followed by the evil laugh of the prophetess, he sped towards the
forest. After him came Nahoon, his tongue hanging from his jaws like the
tongue of a wolf.

Now he was in the shadow of the forest, but still he sped on following
the course of the river, till at length his breath failed, and he halted
on the further side of a little glade, beyond which a great tree grew.
Nahoon was more than a spear's throw behind him; therefore he had time
to draw his pistol and make ready.

"Halt, Nahoon," he cried, as once before he had cried; "I would speak
with you."

The Zulu heard his voice, and obeyed.

"Listen," said Hadden. "We have run a long race and fought a long fight,
you and I, and we are still alive both of us. Very soon, if you come on,
one of us must be dead, and it will be you, Nahoon, for I am armed and
as you know I can shoot straight. What do you say?"

Nahoon made no answer, but stood still at the edge of the glade, his
wild and glowering eyes fixed on the white man's face and his breath
coming in short gasps.

"Will you let me go, if I let you go?" Hadden asked once more. "I
know why you hate me, but the past cannot be undone, nor can the dead be
brought to earth again."

Still Nahoon made no answer, and his silence seemed more fateful and
more crushing than any speech; no spoken accusation would have been so
terrible in Hadden's ear. He made no answer, but lifting his assegai he
stalked grimly toward his foe.

When he was within five paces Hadden covered him and fired. Nahoon
sprang aside, but the bullet struck him somewhere, for his right
arm dropped, and the stabbing spear that he held was jerked from it
harmlessly over the white man's head. But still making no sound, the
Zulu came on and gripped him by the throat with his left hand. For a
space they struggled terribly, swaying to and fro, but Hadden was
unhurt and fought with the fury of despair, while Nahoon had been
twice wounded, and there remained to him but one sound arm wherewith to
strike. Presently forced to earth by the white man's iron strength, the
soldier was down, nor could he rise again.

"Now we will make an end," muttered Hadden savagely, and he turned to
seek the assegai, then staggered slowly back with starting eyes and
reeling gait. For there before him, still clad in her white robe, a
spear in her hand, stood the spirit of Nanea!

"Think of it," he said to himself, dimly remembering the words of the
inyanga, "when you stand face to face with the ghost of the dead in
the Home of the Dead."

There was a cry and a flash of steel; the broad spear leapt towards him
to bury itself in his breast. He swayed, he fell, and presently Black
Heart clasped that great reward which the word of the Bee had promised
Him.

*****

"Nahoon! Nahoon!" murmured a soft voice, "awake, it is no ghost, but
I--Nanea--I, your living wife, to whom my Ehlose[*] has given it me to
save you."

     [*] Guardian Spirit.

Nahoon heard and opened his eyes to look and his madness left him.

"Welcome, wife," he said faintly, "now I will live since Death has
brought you back to me in the House of the Dead."

*****

To-day Nahoon is one of the Indunas of the English Government in
Zululand, and there are children about his kraal. It was from the lips
of none other than Nanea his wife that the teller of this tale heard its
substance.

The Bee also lives and practises as much magic as she dares under the
white man's rule. On her black hand shines a golden ring shaped like a
snake with ruby eyes, and of this trinket the Bee is very proud.





End of Project Gutenberg's Black Heart and White Heart, by H. Rider Haggard

